♪♪
(seagulls crying)
(bell rattling lightly)
JUD: 'Tis in the blood,
your fathefid say.
Mining, 'tis in the blood.
Like a vein of copper.
'Tis the bread of life.
Eat, sleep, live and breathe it.
She ls your salvation
and your downfall.
(knocking at the door)
MAN: My Lord!
(knocking continues)
My Lord Basset“.!
JUD: It'd make you reckless,
it'd make you bold.
It isn't right.
This is all we have.
Many a friend it'd break.
And many more would follow.
MAN: My Lord Basset“.!
There are bailiffs
at Wheal Reath!
(knocking continues)
JUD: 'Tis a fool's game.
You can't do this!
JUD: It will end in tears.
I admire your optimism.
Your father died
before his time.
In his bed.
That's what mining did for him.
MAN: Lord Basset“.!
JUD: And he won't be
the last, neither.
And if he were here today,
he'd tell you not to make
the same mistake.
I wonder.
(gunshot)
(rooster crowing)
DEMELZA: Judas, that's cold!
It's freezing!
Satisfied?
Shouldn't I be?
Ain't enough not to stink!
A body must scrub herself raw
as a buttock of beef
to please some folk!
What happened?
'Tis the mine, Ross.
They closed it.
They closed Wheal Reath.
Is it true?
About Lord Bassett?
It would appear so.
Will we be blamed?
Did we furnish the pistol?
We called in his loans.
No, we declined to extend them.
Does it not reflect poorly on us
that we let his pleas
fall upon deaf ears?
Are we in the business
of sentiment or profit'?
Will I be going now, Mr. George?
Have you been dismissed?
No, but happen I have
other engagements.
None that reward you so well.
Return to my chamber.
And...
In future, you will
address me as "sir."
Yes, sir.
These ancient families
lack backbone.
I wonder they survive.
JIM: Why would they close it?
ROSS: Believe me, this is the
bank's doing, not the owner's.
Now Grambler's the only mine
left hereabouts.
Is my uncle taking on men?
Even if he were, my breathing...
You'd welcome a few months
above grass.
I need to work, Ross,
or my mother and sisters
will starve.
Can you use a farm hand?
So, now we'll be home to all the
waifs and strays in the county?
Rags and tatters of Wheal Reath
and their begging bowls?
♪♪
Ross!
You still here, boy?
When do you leave for London?
I'm minded to stay.
And take my chances here.
As I expected.
Stubborn as your father!
Little good it did him.
Well, I fancy you'll do better.
Better than his cousin?
You heard about Wheal Reath?
And the owner.
Lord Bassett shot himself.
Bad business.
Very bad.
Does Grambler have loans
with the Warleggans?
Everyone has loans
with the Warleggans.
That doesn't alarm you?
George is like a brother
to Francis.
You must visit me soon, Verity.
And neglect her duties here?
She has no time
for gadding about.
Well, I trust you've learnt
one lesson today?
The hazards of owning a mine.
(doorknob rattling)
Feeling tired, my dear?
A little.
Perhaps I should rest a while.
Shall I join you?
(birds squawking)
Oh, not in here!
Poldark, we have orders
to take you to Bodmin Jail
for inciting a riot!
(laughing)
You have a new farmhand.
'Tis a fine thing
you've done for Jim.
Happen you could do
the same thing for we?
Below ground.
You have pitches already,
at Grambler.
Where it please your uncle
to pay us starvation wages.
The owners have we
by the throat, Ross.
We can't go on like this.
I can promise nothing.
(dripping echoes)
♪♪
Ah.
Father tells me
you intend to remain.
Does that disappoint you?
Not at all.
We were always more friends
than cousins.
I would be sorry
if that changed.
I've been wondering if this mine
was entirely worked out.
You don't think
of reopening her?
I'll think of anything
that might help those
poor devils at Wheal Reath.
You consider them
your responsibility?
You don't?
My father doesn't trust me
with responsibility.
He likes to keep the mysteries
of mine-owning to himself.
Perhaps we should open
Leisure together?
Share the burden and the spoils.
What are you doing?
This is no task for you!
Let me or Mrs. Taft.
What may I do, then?
There is much you may do,
Elizabeth.
You're the lady of the house.
You may go out when you choose,
pay calls, attend balls.
And may you not?
I'm 25.
Unmarried.
I spin and I bake,
pick preserves,
I dose the servants
when they're ill.
My life is not your life.
ROSS: Suppose I wished
to open a mine?
I'd suppose you'd taken leave
of your senses.
What in the least
would I require?
Capital?
I have none.
Expertise?
A smattering.
Allies?
None of means.
My cousin will lend his name.
So you'd require investors.
Can you find me any?
In these uncertain times?
With no experience,
no bona fides,
and a reputation
somewhat tarnished?
Are you speaking as my banker
or my friend?
Both.
Good day, m'lord.
Are we acquainted, ma'am?
We could be.
I have neither time
nor the money
to seek such diversions.
What do you seek,
m'lord?
Better days ahead, I see.
A prosperous business.
Perhaps you should try
a different profession.
A sweetheart, perhaps?
I made the mistake
of going to war.
And when you returned,
she was pledged to another.
Yet you still care for her.
Perhaps she loves you still.
♪♪
Ross!
Verity!
"ROSS". You escaped, then?
Father's gone to the mine
for an hour.
I see you've not been idle.
I needed a distraction.
Demelza!
This is my cousin Verity.
VERITY: Has she settled?
Still somewhat feral.
Does your wound still pain you?
Less than it did.
Then I wonder if I might ask you
the greatest of favors.
My dear.
Tonight's assembly,
will you not reconsider?
You know how I love to show off
my wife to the world.
Where's he going?
To the dance.
He don't look too glad about it.
Gentlefolks is strange.
(lively music playing)
I'm obliged to you, Ross.
For vanquishing my loathing
of a gavotte?
For persuading father
to let me come.
As official escort,
I'm entirely at your service.
Don't be!
Look to your liberty, cousin.
Is it in danger?
From a great many girls
who would be glad to acquire
the name of Poldark.
Those ruffians at Wheal Reath
made a nuisance of themselves.
You can hardly expect them
to celebrate the closure.
They have no business
to have an opinion at all.
Some would say
that view is outdated.
In America, for instance,
they have more liberal views.
All men created equal?
Preposterous.
Distinctions of rank
must be preserved.
Especially when they're
so dearly bought.
To the trade!
And to Captain Ross,
for providing
for our ease and comfort!
This be the life!
Not dancing, Ross?
Will none of the ladies
have you?
(chuckling)
The whiff of soil
is hard to swill off,
but if one communes
with peasants...
Do you prescribe perfume?
It covers a multitude of sins.
Like money.
(chuckling)
Indeed.
For how else
would a family of blacksmiths
become bankers?
One of these days,
you may come knocking.
I would need to be desperate.
I look forward to the prospect.
You know that lady?
Captain Poldark.
Miss Teague.
How do you find your first ball?
Exceeding all expectations, sir.
A sea captain?
How invigorating!
One is seldom idle.
And so much to remember.
The sails, the masts...
Are you interested
in rigging, ma'am?
Oh, exceedingly!
Are you fond of dancing,
Captain Poldark?
I fear I possess few of the
refinements of polite society.
(door squeaking open)
♪♪
(note plays)
(rambunctious singing)
(singing fades)
Ross Poldark!
Mr. Treneglos?
I saw you sniffing round
that old strumpet the other day!
(laughing)
Wheal Leisure.
You don't mean to resurrect her?
It would take a brave man
to open a mine now.
Don't you agree, Henshawe?
Depends on the mine.
Nil Ln?
You were mine captain at Leisure
in my father's day.
I was.
You worked her for tin? Aye.
But in the last samples taken,
there were definite signs
of copper.
A pity she closed
before we could dig further.
But if you know of anyone
willing to chance
a little speculation,
Mr. Pascoe?
I'll see what can be done.
I'd require discretion.
I fully comprehend you, sir.
Mizzenmast, you say?
Which is part square-rigged
and carries a gaff.
A gaff?
And a spanker boom.
So many names!
(giggling)
When may I see you again?
(laughs)
Captain Blarney,
that I couldn't say.
(screams)
Judas!
What you be doing in there?
Just looking.
Just looking?
There's books and maps
and knives and a harpsichord.
Well, can you read?
Can you DWI'?
I can try...
There'll be nothing in there
for the likes of we.
Unless we be getting ideas
above our station?
No!
Go home.
What?
Back where you come from.
You don't belong here.
Forgive me.
I do not wish to appear forward,
but I'd dearly like us
to be better acquainted.
I too.
I should not have said that.
What must you think of me?
Can you be unaware
of that, ma'am'?
Remind me, Captain Poldark,
was I engaged to you
for this next dance?
Not that I recall.
Would you excuse me?
Oh, Ross!
Are you come to take my wife
off my hands?
If she has no objection.
Did you not promise me
this dance?
The cotillion.
And I dare say
Ross will return you to me
in one piece.
(lively tune begins)
Your cousin is most attentive.
Hmm? To your wife.
FRANCIS: Oh, I don't think
he cares for dancing.
He only came to please Verity.
Who is that man?
Captain Blarney.
Master of the Lisbon packet.
GEORGE: A pretty catch.
And at her age...
She won't get many more chances?
FRANCIS: But Father
couldn't spare her.
And Elizabeth would miss her.
Though doubtless your wife
would find ways
of distracting herself.
♪♪
(conversation inaudible)
(applause)
Ross!
May I introduce
Captain Andrew Blarney?
My cousin Ross Poldark,
my sister-in-law
Elizabeth Poldark.
Your servant, ma'am, sir.
I hope our boisterous spirits
don't offend you, sir.
Not in the least, ma'am.
I have every reason
to be happy myself.
If I could dare to hope
that my interest would
in the smallest way be returned.
I think you might dare
to hope that, sir.
May I speak with your father?
(Elizabeth laughing)
You may think me presumptuous,
but my attachment is sincere.
I would not wish to proceed
without his approval.
Forgive me,
I must speak with my cousin.
My dear, I believe Francis
is looking for you.
VERITY: People love to gossip.
ROSS: Isn't that why they
come to such evenings?
But to give them cause?
To make your attentions
so pronounced?
Whatever was between you,
trust me,
she's put it behind her.
So must you.
You'll take supper with us?
Thank you.
I've no appetite.
Miss Verity,
I cannot go to your father
without your being in full
possession of the facts.
GEORGE: Ross Poldark in love?
Quite the spectacle.
Though may I say
an excellent choice.
Ruth Teague
is unlikely to remind one
of a previous attachment.
♪♪
May I be of service, m'lord?
One service is all I require.
(bells ringing)
(ringing continues)
(sighs)
You don't say much, m'lord.
But perhaps you don't pay me
for my conversation.
My apologies.
I was not in a talkative mood
last night.
A rare hand.
Knows what it wants,
but not always how to get it.
(humming)
(hoof beats)
♪♪
(quiet breathing)
(loud knocking at door)
CHARLES: Ls my nephew at home?
Uncle.
To what do I owe the pleasure?
Opening a mine?
Despite our conversation?
Exploring the idea.
Stubborn.
Rash.
Won't take "no" for an answer.
Well...
The curse of the Poldarks.
And our salvation!
I salute you, boy.
Take Francis with you.
He needs to learn
some initiative.
When do you meet?
Tomorrow, if Pascoe
can drum up any interest.
Francis will come.
He must learn to stand
on his own two feet.
You must help him.
I will, Uncle, of course.
But if you could urge
discretion?
Especially with regard
to his good friend George?
(grunts)
Ready for you, sir.
Demelza!
Sir.
You look weary to the bone.
Have they been making you
a beast of burden?
No, sir, I be content, sir.
It be that Jud.
He be saying I got ideas,
but I ain't got ideas!
No?
I do know me place!
Your place is where I say it is.
Fetch your cloak.
Sir?
Never had no cloak.
♪♪
This is an important day
for us both.
Let's see who can strike
the better bargain.
Verity?
Oh, Ross!
Is Francis with you?
He's at the inn.
Can I be of service?
I believe I can manage.
No, allow me.
Did you enjoy the assembly?
Ruth Teague seemed
very taken with you.
I scarcely remember her.
ELIZABETH: How can that be?
There were distractions.
Perhaps you should pursue her.
Would that please you?
I have to go.
Verity will be looking for me.
Three pence.
Four pence.
Four pence
and you've got a sale.
I'll leave you.
Ross.
Shall we go?
I'm in no mood to speculate.
May I ask why?
I need something
I can depend on.
♪♪
Are we expecting your cousin?
Francis has changed his mind.
A pity.
He would've lent a certain...
Gravity?
Gentlemen, welcome.
You come here today
to decide one thing:
Whether to risk good gold
in the pursuit of copper.
(murmuring)
The times could hardly be
less auspicious,
when Wheal Reath closes...
And Grambler's future
hangs in the balance.
When Welsh mines prosper
and Cornwall's on its knees,
what chance has
this meager venture?
Your cousin divides opinion.
Some think him arrogant.
Others observe
a sense of entitlement.
To what?
Whatever takes his fancy.
But perhaps they misjudge him.
So what do I hear
of his latest venture?
The venture is small,
so overheads will be low.
Without Reath, supplies
to the markets will fall,
so the price of copper
should rise.
And if it doesn't?
Is he seeking investment?
I really couldn't say.
The question is,
what will it cost us?
To begin with,
I propose to act as manager
and head purser without salary.
If Captain Henshawe
would oversee the works.
Also without salary?
At a favorable rate,
until we're up and running.
If Mr. Renfrew
would supply gear and tackle
at nominal cost.
The man has impudence!
Pascoe's Bank will honor
our drafts up to 300 pounds.
Pascoe's Bank?
Yes.
Not Warleggans?
Warleggans would be happy
to accommodate him,
given the friendship
between our families.
But perhaps he doesn't
value friendship.
Or family.
Warleggans will lend to a mine
for as long as it prospers,
but once it starts to struggle,
they withdraw credit
and see it go under.
They could close Grambler
tomorrow,
as they closed Reath.
Business is business,
but should profit be
the be-all and end-all?
It ought to be.
I'm inclined to agree.
We knew Reath was struggling,
but closing it cost
the shareholders dear.
And the miners dearer.
And the owner his life.
We cannot choose our family,
but we can choose our friends.
And as a friend, I say to you,
if ever you need
my assistance...
And what assistance
might I need?
What any man needs.
Someone to alert him
if he sees his friend
being played for a fool.
A fool?
In love, in business...
At cards...
It's true my losses have
been considerable of late.
Then let me prove our friendship
by advancing
whatever might defray them.
Gentlemen,
I'll be straight with you.
The rewards
could be considerable,
but so are the risks.
But if you like a wager...
And which of us here doesn't?...
Then I would sooner gamble
on a vein of copper
and the sweat of 50 men
than on the turn of a card.
50 guineas apiece will cover
the first three months.
There's mine.
And mine.
If I may take the liberty
of proposing a toast?
A toast.
To Wheal Leisure!
ALL: Wheal Leisure!
He tried to swizzle me,
but I beat him down.
I expected no less.
A good day's work for us both.
What am I, a circus attraction?
A poorly dressed one.
Come with me.
♪♪
CHARLES: This cannot continue.
She must be brought
to her senses.
FRANCIS: She must indeed,
but what of him?
Has he no sense of shame?
CHARLES:
I hold her most to blame!
She must have encouraged him.
FRANCIS: If you had seen
her at the assembly!
CHARLES: But you were there!
Could you not have
put a stop to it?
FRANCIS:
I should not have needed to!
She should be mistress
of her own behavior.
CHARLES: Something
must be done at once
before our family name
is dragged through the mud.
♪♪
(knocking)
Jud?
Jud!
Prudie!
You be looking for Mister Ross?
I am.
Elizabeth.
Have you been offered
some refreshment?
Your maid has done her best.
You can go.
Oh, Ross...
What is it?
How to even begin
to put it into words?
Don't try.
You love Francis,
I love Francis,
but this cannot be allowed
to continue.
Out.
Well, damn me if a man
can't get about his sacred
and profane duties
without a blasting from...
Out!
You must speak with Francis.
And your uncle.
You must speak
with both of them.
I'll follow you directly.
Saddle my horse.
And remind me to thrash you
when I return.
Ain't no call for that,
Mister Ross.
'Tisn't just, 'tisn't kind,
'tisn't civil...
'tisn't friendly.
It's a bad business, Ross.
But we must make the best of it.
Verity has greatly
disappointed us.
Verity?
You're aware that she formed
an attachment at the ball?
Who could fail to be aware?
She was all over the man!
The sea captain? Blarney?
He's been secretly paying court
to her ever since.
Hoping, no doubt, to secure her
before she became aware
of his appalling past.
The varmint!
FRANCIS: He's a drunkard
who beat his wife to death.
Is this certain?
Verity has confirmed it.
And forgiven him.
CHARLES: She's a plain girl,
and that makes her easy prey.
We must close ranks
and protect her.
Of course.
But how?
She will not leave this house
until she swears
never to see him again.
VERITY: Ross!
I heard what they told you.
It isn't true.
It was an accident.
She tried to strike him.
He pushed her away.
She fell and hit her head.
He told you this?
At the ball.
But there was never any intent
to harm her.
None in the world.
And he's paid for what he did.
He lost his rank
and went to prison.
And I know he would never lift
a finger to hurt me.
Still, how can you be sure...
I'm sure.
He loves me.
I love him.
You of all people know
what that feels like.
Yes.
(sighs)
What can I do?
BLAMEY: Captain Poldark.
Most generous to allow us
to meet here
in view of your concerns.
Verity trusts you.
I trust Verity.
She's my angel of redemption.
You'll have no cause
to regret it.
I believe you, sir.
Sir.
Dammit.
Tell our guests
to keep to the parlor.
Farming is such an engaging
hobby, is it not?
More than a hobby for me, ma'am.
But do you not hunt,
Captain Poldark?
Would it not be a fine thing
to be mixing with people
of your own station?
I'm very well occupied here.
Of course Ruth is
an accomplished rider.
Of course.
Not that it's her only
accomplishment.
One only has to taste
her syllabubs
to know their succulence.
Indeed.
Is Miss Verity still
meeting that blackguard
in spite of her father?
I, uh...
Of course you're so
out of the way here,
you would not hear of it.
No, indeed.
This must be the young person
that you adopted?
I've adopted no one.
I needed a kitchen wench.
The girl is old enough
to know her own mind.
Of course.
She looks as if
she would know her own mind.
But I must beg
your indulgence, ladies.
There is much I must attend too.
But you must
take tea with us
at Teague House.
Perhaps we can show you
what a woman's touch can do
to a home.
I thank you, ma'am,
but I fear...
your efforts would be...
wasted.
Yes, of course.
(faint conversation)
(loud sweeping)
Have you had word
of your family?
No, sir.
Don't expect none.
Want me to skivvy for them.
They'll have no love of me.
Particularly your father.
He's too busy
down in the mine.
And your brothers?
Soon to be following
in his footsteps.
Seems we both have mining
in our blood.
Aye, sir.
God knows if that's a blessing
or a curse.
(thunder rumbling)
This is good timing!
I was about to ride
to Wheal Leisure.
The investors' meeting
went well.
I hope I may yet
persuade Francis to join us.
That will depend.
I take nothing for granted.
And I still ask for George
to be kept in the dark.
I doubt your friendship
would prevent him betraying you
if the need arose.
Any more than our kinship
has prevented you
from betraying us?
Do you deny that Verity
is meeting that man
at your house?
I think you misjudge him.
I think I've misjudged you!
Filthy skunk!
Sneaking behind our backs
to debauch my sister!
Deceiving her family...
Francis, please!
If you and your father
refuse to meet me...
We do not deal
with wife murderers!
I have a right
to choose my own life!
Honor means nothing
to your sort.
Well, perhaps a thrashing will!
Not in my house!
You have the impudence
to take his side?
I take no one's side,
but you won't change the issue
with this foolery.
I have no wish to quarrel,
but Verity is coming with me.
That she is not!
There'll be no cleaning
of your boots on this family!
You insolent puppy!
Oh, "puppy," is it?
When will it be convenient
for you to meet me,
Captain Blarney?
As soon as you like, sir.
VERITY: Andrew, no!
Francis, please...
Get me a pistol.
Get one yourself.
This fellow claims to be
a gentleman.
Let him step outside
and prove it!
Francis, no!
Ross, stop them!
Stop him, he's out
of his depth, Charles.
Francis, I implore you...
Andrew, please, for my sake!
CHARLES: Francis!
Have no truck
with this scoundrel!
Verity will come home with us.
Yes, Father!
It's gone beyond that...
The skunk insulted me!
Fight it out with fists, then.
He's not worth the risk
of a pistol!
Do you want this family
to be a laughingstock?
Francis, I urge you
to consider...
Consider what?
That anyone may abuse our trust
and take advantage of us?
Francis, I beg you...
I will have satisfaction.
You there, act as referee.
Can you count?
Aye, sir.
One, two, four, seven...
Do it ourselves.
One...
Two...
Stop them, please stop them!
Four, five, six,
seven, eight,
nine,
ten!
(gunshots)
Francis!
(thunder rumbling)
Prudie!
Fetch me some water.
I know it was not
your intention.
God forbid.
Help me stop the bleeding.
I can't, sir.
I be afeared of the blood.
VERITY: Surely you must see
how impossible it would be
for us to be together now?
I do see.
I'll help, sir...
I bain't afeared.
Good-bye, Verity.
(sobbing)
Where is he?
Oh, God!
No, no, no!
How could you let this happen?
Elizabeth...
You let him die!
How could you let him die?
Speak to him.
Your cousin do owe you his life.
Where'd you learn
to do such things?
On the battlefields of Virginia.
(loud knock)
You are a disgrace
to the name of Poldark.
I'm sorry you think so.
I offer no thanks.
I feel no gratitude.
I hold you entirely to blame.
I understand.
I do not blame you.
I wouldn't for the world
wish him hurt.
I know that.
And I'm grateful
for all you've done.
Come, Elizabeth!
The more so now since,
more than ever,
I need him well and at my side.
I'm with child.
CHARLES: Elizabeth!
Do I have "half-wit"
branded across my forehead?
No.
Yet I fell for it again.
Built a castle
out of winks and smiles.
All the while...
I should be grateful.
What clearer proof is needed?
(exhales deeply)
Fetch Jim and Jud and Prudie.
We have work to do.
♪♪
You did well today.
I can see how valuable
you must be to your family.
Sir?
And if you miss them...
If you feel their need
is greater than mine...
You be wanting rid of me?
What?
You be wishing me gone?
Sir, I'll work harder.
I'll scrub and scour
and fettle and...
Demelza, your work is
more than satisfactory.
Then why, sir?
I was merely offering you
the chance to return
to your home.
If that's where you feel
you belong.
I belong here.
♪♪